---
layout: post
author: guido
title: "The bully"
hideLogo: true
header-img: "img/posts/heroes/ww.jpg"
excerpt: A post about the Bully hero pattern in software development.
---
# The bully

*This post belongs to small series of posts. The main post is [Heroes](/31/05/2018/Heroes/).* 

In this post, I will talk about the hero bully. With that, I am not talking about the typical bully behaviour that comes to mind. Someone that everyone fears, almost nobody likes and who rules by force of intimidation. The bully may seem like an obvious anti-pattern. But it is not always as clear-cut as one oppressive individual. After all, there is little heroic about that. What I am talking about here is heroes, who are placed on a pedestal by one group and who use the power from their received status to bully those around them that don't follow suit. In this regard, the bully often goes hand in hand with the hero gunslinger. Because depending if you oppose or disagree with them, heroes can become bullies who 'rule' by brute force and by the political weight that was given to them. After all who would dare to go against the hero of the people?

> A hero to some, a bully to others

While they may be feared instead of loved by some or most of their peers, the terrorizing gunslingers still appear heroes for the people of the town. Their heroes still get the job done and the townspeople care about the results. They don't need to collaborate with the gunslingers themselves. So the bullies remain 'in power' by the approval of the townspeople in the one hand, and by intimidating and belittling any potential contenders on the other hand.


### Bullies grow in teams

In the software industry, a bully appears just like with any other group of people. A bully forms when someone tries to dominate a group of people, forcing them to do what they want. Since most software development occurs in teams, it is natural that bullies tend to appear there. Especially in large firms where the teams or fixed, it is easier for a  bully to form and take root because the relations have the time to grow and get fixed. When one only needs to work together for a short period of time it is not so easy to establish a dominant role. It takes some "convincing", pressuring over time and it builds on perceived status.

### Establishing dominance

Software developers typically try to establish dominance by demonstrating superior knowledge in some technical field. A framework, application, language, technology... Even if one doesn't really have deep knowledge on a topic, one can fake it by making a lot of noise, spouting some buzzwords and professing that the opposing party is a \[*insert derogatory term here*\]. 

Those without technical knowledge can often mistake decibels for competence. Bullies can appear to know what they are talking about. Typically the business has no way to know and will often start placing their trust in those bullies because they appear to be experts and/or get the job done. 

It is of course also possible that bullies are truly experts in their field and do know best. But even then is 'winning' an argument by force not a good idea since it impacts so much more than just the bullied peers. 

### Unintentional bullies

Most of us have the potential of becoming bullies to some, so it is something to watch out for. 

If one is lauded often enough, as the expert or hero that saved the day, then the ego might start acting up. One can start to assume that they are always right. Tip: You are not. This is the [ego](/26/06/2018/LocalHero##ego) thing again that can transform a hero into a bully.

If you are unaware of the political power that was given to you, you may end up bullying people without even being aware of it. Power can be given officially by the role that you are assigned to an organisation. But it can also be obtained unofficially by reputation alone. The latter is difficult because we aren't always immediately aware of the reputation we have obtained.

I think the best way to avoid bullying other is by simply listening to what people have to say. At least hear them out and see if your ideas can stand up against debated arguments. Do not try to 'win' by force. This is not to say that if one truly does know 'best', you are not allowed to advocate your point. As a professional, it is your responsibility to give the customer the greatest value for their money so one should definitely speak up.

>A point should be made on sound arguments. Not on insults or decibels.

### Dungeon masters

A while back Alberto Brandolini identified a pattern he called the [Dungeon master](https://medium.com/@ziobrando/the-rise-and-fall-of-the-dungeon-master-c2d511eed12f)[^dungeon]. Now the Dungeon master is a position every one of us might find themselves in if we stay at a job long enough. It is not a position of malevolence. Just a possible evolution.
 
> The dark secret of the Dungeon Master is that he knows every trap in the existing legacy software because he was the one to leave the traps around. This isn’t intentional or evil. Knowledge, in the form of accidental complexity, starts accumulating in the head of the Dungeon Master, and silently grows.

The danger of a dungeon master is that when dungeon masters have coupled their ego's to their 'dungeon'. then they will become a force that resists change and improvement. Because when you criticize the dungeon, you criticize them. If this is combined with a dungeon master that has a [local hero](/26/06/2018/LocalHero/) status then the DM can become a major obstacle in the never-ending road to improvement. Because they will become a bully to anyone that criticizes the existing system. Their dungeon, their baby. Since they have all the knowledge, a hero status and possibly some [minions](/26/06/2018/LocalHero##minions) they can easily block any new idea's. Changes that must be made, bottlenecks that must be fix, software that needs to be replaced... all of these initiatives can be blocked by a **bully dungeon master**.

While a dungeon master in itself is not an evil force, a bully is. A dungeon master can become a bully. A bully that goes unobstructed long enough will often evolve into a dungeon master by choice. Giving them that much more power. Because now they are the only ones that know all the traps and pitfalls. Making it almost impossible to go against them.
  

### Conclusion

As an employer beware that those that appear to be heroes, the hallmark of competence, to you may very well become bullies to others. Beware that you aren't left with a couple self-aggrandizing loudmouths, supported by some meek minions, while the competent, constructive professionals who wanted the best for the company have left you without you even noticing it. 

Make sure to hear more than one side of the story and be *very* careful with who you grant "special" status. 

To my fellow Software engineers, I would ask, again, to Let go of your ego. People will respect you so much more. 

**References**

[^dungeon]: In Alberto's [Dungeon master](https://medium.com/@ziobrando/the-rise-and-fall-of-the-dungeon-master-c2d511eed12f) post he introduces the pattern of the dungeon master. And even mentions the minions. Which could possibly correlate to my definition of minions.



